It was a pleasure, not work at all, doing this, and easily the most enjoyable competition I've judged. It's partly because poems are an effort, usually, through sheer length and density, and in competitions - as in magazine editing, actually, the effort is rarely repaid. But you have to put the work in, because, as the saying is, a poem is only as good as its reader. The beauty of this job was that you could get the measure of the whole piece in one go, even if as with a surprising number of them you were far from exhausting the poem in one or two reads. This was true of even the shortest of the long shortlist: "They phone you up, your mum and dad." It didn't reach the final seven, but it's already a catchphrase in our house. What's more, it is postmodern (though admittedly it isn't bollocks), because of its self-referentiality, recasting (and therefore commenting on) a famous line of poetry while at the same time talking about mobiles, or at any rate about a generation independent but always because of the phone in shouting distance. Also, this poem made us laugh out loud.

Still, "They phone you up" didn't make the cut because it depends too much on the Larkin line it parodies. Others though not as short were just as concise and presented stories or traded insights or humour often with texture of language and rhythmical purpose (as we say in the trade). "Ying", for instance, another spoof we were sorry to let go, has the oriental or rather new age whiff of a manx haiku: 'uncovered, I can/ still smell my wet hair/even in the dark.'

As you might expect, a number of the entries were haikus. In Chinese, haikus are real poems because, so I'm told, neighbouring words alter each other's meanings, allowing the texts to open in the mind like paper flowers in a tumbler of water. Whereas in English, they tend to be short, up-their-own-arse poems made by grown men in brown cords walking up and down counting. I said as much once, the inspiration as it turned out for this: 'Peter Sansom says/Not to bother with haiku./Well, he can fuck off.'

Which is to say one of the joys of the competition was how much grainy real-life could be got into 160 characters, though there was room for delicate watercolour too. The most interesting aspect, and which may actually be quite radical, is how having to scroll down the screen makes the reading experience entirely linear, giving real suspense to each line break, making us attend to every word and to guess ahead before the new line comes up. You can't help glancing down the page in ordinary poems for clues, for orientation; but with a text poem you stay focussed as it were in the now of each arriving line.

This gives extra force, for instance, to punch lines, and indeed makes it seem an urgent business, reading a text poem, like the pools score teleprinter used to be, or how it was when Ezra Pound said poetry was news that stays news.

UA Fanthorpe's comments
There is a quality of jokiness about English poetry, and the Guardian's terse verse contest encouraged that. So did its text message format, which has affinities with the resourceful stratagems of the old telegram. I like a poem that starts "Pls, stop sendg msgs2ths". The reader is being tested, as with a crossword puzzle or a Shakespeare play.

Poetry has always enjoyed fiddling around with the shapes of words and numbers of words or number of syllables: haiku, cinquain, englyn, and so on, and I have to admit to writing a poem about a road sign, in road sign language, which consists partly of words with their vowels extracted and partly of shorthand versions of place names. So in a way, the newest thing about the Guardian's competition was not the text message style, but the precise number of characters available.

It was interesting to see how inventive the competitors were. Some wrote fairly normal poems (as far as style is concerned); some wrote with as much technical resourcefulness as possible. The results were disappointing in some ways, in that the subjects tended to be rather predictable - the usual subjects, in fact: love/sex predominated, along with "special moments".

I've recently been judging another (more familiar) poetry competition, where the range of subjects was infinitely more surprising. But it is, of course, difficult to get far with such a small word count; you have, on the whole, to be sure that the reader understands what you're writing about from the start. And limitation of form means that it's difficult to achieve very much complexity of feeling.

I was looking for wit and technical inventiveness in the more technologically adventurous poems, and for imagination, density and the magical quality of take-off in the others. On the whole, the less technical did better - partly because the more technical had struggles with layout, and characteristically became unstuck with the last line, which is always where a poem either works or doesn't.

There were some poems which I shall remember with delight, but which didn't achieve the Final Seven because there wasn't enough substance to them: I treasure particularly two.

"They phone you up, your mum and dad."

"Basildon: imagine a carpark."

It was surprising how many competitors used rhyme, I suspect as a substitute for imagery. The form allowed only exceptionally gifted writers to develop an image to any extent, whereas the inevitable brevity made it quite easy to make something of a rhyme, if not exactly a rhyme-scheme. I was moved and amazed at how much feeling could be introduced in so small a space: there was great tenderness, spirit, imagination in the best entries.

On the other hand, it was sad to see how some, faced with such a small canvas, squandered words when they could have used the possibilities more fruitfully.
